In the 15th year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea,
Herod was district ruler of Galilee.
Philip, his brother, was district ruler
of the country of Iteria and Trachonitis,
and Lysanius was district ruler of Abelene
in the days of chief priest Annus and of Caeophus.
God's declaration came to John,
the son of Zechariah, the wilderness.
This man came as a witness
in order to bear witness about the light
so that people of all sorts
might believe through him.
He was not that light,
but he was meant to bear witness about that light.
In those days,
John the Baptist came preaching
in the wilderness of Judea.
Repent for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.
So he went into all the country around the Jordan,
preaching baptism in symbol of repentance
for forgiveness of sins.
Just as it is written in the book
of the words of Isaiah the prophet,
a voice of one crying out in the wilderness,
prepare the way of Jehovah,
make his roads straight,
every valley must be filled up,
and every mountain and hill leveled.
The crooked ways must become straight
and the rough ways smooth,
and all flesh will see
the salvation of God.
Now John was clothed with camel's air
and had a leather belt around his waist.
His food was locusts and wild honey
then the people of Jerusalem and all Judea
and all the country around the Jordan
were going out to him
and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
Openly confessing their sins
when he caught sight of many of the Pharisees
and Sadducees coming to the baptism.
He said to them,
You offspring of vipers
who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath.
Therefore, produce fruit that befits repentance,
do not presume to say to yourselves,
we have Abraham as our Father.
For I say to you,
that God is able to raise up children for Abraham
from these stones.
The axe is already lying at the root of the trees,
every tree then that does not produce fine fruit.
It's to be cut down and thrown into the fire
and the crowns were asking him,
what then should we do?
Let the man who has two garments share with the man who has none
and let the one who has something to eat do the same.
Even tax collectors came to be baptized.
Teacher!
What should we do?
Do not demand anything more than the tax rate.
Also, those in military service were asking him,
what should we do to not harass anybody
or accuse anybody falsely
but be satisfied with your provisions?
Now the people were in expectation
and all of them were reasoning in their hearts about John.
May he perhaps be the Christ?
John gave the answer, saying to all,
I, for my part,
baptized you with the water
that the one stronger than I am is coming,
the less of whose sandals I am not worthy to one die.
He will baptize you with holy spirit
and with fire,
his winnowing shovel is in his hand
to clean up his dressing floor completely,
and together the wheat into his stoy else.
But the chaff,
he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.
He also gave many other exhortations
and continued declaring good news to the people.
Then Jesus came from Galilee
to the Jordan to John
in order to be baptized by him.
But the latter tried to prevent him.
I'm the one who needs to be baptized by you.
Are you coming to me?
Let it be this time.
For in that way, it is suitable for us
to carry out all that is righteous.
Then he quit preventing him,
after being baptized.
Jesus immediately came up from the water.
Heavens were opened up
and he saw God's spirit descending
like a dove
and coming upon him.
Also, a voice from the heavens said,
This is my son,
the beloved whom I have...
And immediately,
the spirit impelled him
to go into the wilderness
so he continued in the wilderness for forty days,
being tempted by Satan.
He was with the wild beasts.
But the angels were ministering to him.
When Jesus began his work,
he was about thirty years old,
being the son,
as the opinion was,
of Joseph,
son of Hilar,
son of Matthat,
son of Levi,
son of Melkai,
son of Janai,
son of Joseph,
son of Matathias,
son of Amos,
son of Neham,
son of Esly,
son of Nagai,
son of Mayeth,
son of Matathias,
son of Semyon,
son of Joseph,
son of Joda,
son of Joanna,
son of Risa,
son of Zarababel,
son of Chialtiel,
son of Nira,
son of Melkai,
son of Adai,
son of Kosem,
son of Elmaidem,
son of Ur,
son of Jesus,
son of Elieza,
son of Jorum,
son of Matthat,
son of Levi,
son of Semyon,
son of Judas,
son of Joseph,
son of Joan Am,
son of Alayakim,
son of Melia,
son of Menna,
son of Matathar,
son of Nathan,
son of David,
son of Jesse,
son of Obed,
son of Boaz,
son of Salman,
son of Narshan,
son of Aminida,
son of Anar,
son of Hezran,
son of Pires,
son of Judo,
son of Jacob,
son of Isaac,
son of Abraham,
son of Tira,
son of Nehaw,
son of Syra,
son of Rear,
son of Pilek,
son of Eba,
son of Sheila,
son of Kay Einen,
son of Upakshad,
son of Shem,
son of Noah,
son of Lamek,
son of Mathuzela,
son of Enoch,
son of Jared,
son of Mahalavil,
son of Kay Einen,
son of Enoch,
son of Seth,
son of Adam,
of God.
After he had fasted,
for forty days,
and forty nights,
he felt hungry,
the tempter approached.
If you are son of God,
tell these stones,
to become loaves of bread,
it is written,
man must live not on bread alone,
but on every word that comes
from Jehovah's mouth.
Then the devil took him along
into the holy city,
and he stationed him
on the battlement of the temple,
and said to him,
If you are a son of God,
throw yourself down,
for it is written,
he will give his angels
a command concerning you,
and they will carry you on their hands,
so that you may not strike your foot
against the stones.
Again, it is written,
you must not put Jehovah
your God to the test.
So he brought him up,
and showed him all the kingdoms
of the inhabited earth,
in an instant of time.
Then the devil said to him,
I will give you all this authority,
and their glory,
because it has been handed over to me,
and I give it to whoever I wish,
if you therefore,
do an act of worship,
before me,
it will all be yours.
Go away, Satan,
for it is written,
it is Jehovah your God,
you must worship,
and it is to him alone,
you must render sacred service.
Then,
the devil left him.
Angels came,
and began to minister to him.
This is the witness John gave,
when the Jews sent priests
and Levites from Jerusalem
to ask him,
Who are you?
And he admitted it,
and did not deny it.
I am not the Christ.
What then?
Are you Elijah?
I am not.
Are you the prophet?
No.
Who are you?
Tell us,
so that we may give an answer to those who sent us.
What do you say about yourself?
I am a voice,
of someone crying out in the wilderness,
make the way of Jehovah's straight,
just as Isaiah the prophet said.
Now those sent were from the Pharisees,
so they questioned him.
Why then do you baptize,
if you are not the Christ or Elijah or the prophet?
I baptize in water,
understanding among you,
not know,
the one coming behind me,
the lace of whose sandal,
I am not worthy to untie.
These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan,
where John was baptizing.
The next day, he saw Jesus coming toward him.
See, the Lamb of God,
who takes away the sin of the world.
This is the one,
about whom I said behind me,
as a man was advanced in front of me,
for he existed before me.
Even I did not know him,
but the reason why I came baptizing in water
was so that he might be made manifest to Israel.
I viewed the Spirit coming down as a dove,
out of heaven,
and it remained upon him.
Even I did not know him,
but the very one who sent me to baptizing water said to me,
whoever it is upon whom you see the Spirit coming down and remaining.
This is the one,
who baptizes in Holy Spirit.
And I have seen it,
and I've given witness,
that this one is the Son of God.
Again, the next day,
John was standing with two of his disciples,
and as he looked at Jesus walking,
he said,
See, the Lamb of God,
when the two disciples heard him say this,
they followed Jesus,
then Jesus turned,
and seeing them following,
he said to them,
What are you looking for?
Rabbi, where are you staying?
Come, and you'll see.
So they went,
and saw where he was staying,
and they stayed with him that day.
It was about the tenth hour.
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter,
was one of the two who heard what John said,
and followed Jesus.
He first found his own brother, Simon.
We have found the Messiah,
and he led him to Jesus.
And you, Simon,
the Son of John,
will be called Seifas.
The next day,
he wanted to leave for Galilee.
Jesus then found,
Philip,
and said to him,
Be my follower.
Now Philip was from Bethseder,
from the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip found,
Nathaniel.
We have found the one,
of whom Moses,
in the law and the prophets wrote,
Jesus,
the Son of Joseph,
from Nazareth.
Can anything good come out of Nazareth?
Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathaniel coming toward him,
and said about him.
See,
truly,
an Israelite,
in whom there is no deceit.
How do you know me?
Before Philip called you,
while you're under the fig tree.
I saw you.
Rabbi,
you are the Son of God.
You are King of Israel.
Do you believe,
because I told you I saw you're under the fig tree?
You will see things greater than these.
It was truly I say to you, man.
You will see heaven opened up,
and the angels of God
are sending and descending,
to the Son of Man.
And on the third day,
a marriage feast took place,
in Cana of Galilee,
and the mother of Jesus was there.
Jesus and his disciples
were also invited to the marriage feast,
on the wine-red short.
The mother of Jesus said to him,
they have no wine.
Why has that of concern to me to you?
My hour has not yet come.
His mother said to those serving.
Do whatever he tells you.
Now there were six stone water jars sitting there,
as required by the purification rules of the Jews.
Each able to hold two or three liquid measures.
Fill the jars with water.
So they filled them
to the brim.
Draw some out,
and take it to the director of the feast.
So they took it.
When the director of the feast
tasted the water that had now been turned into wine,
not knowing where it came from,
although the servants who had drawn out the water knew.
The director of the feast called the bridegroom
and said to him,
everyone else looked out the fine wine first.
And when people are intoxicated,
the inferior you have saved the fine wine until now.
Jesus did this encana of Galilee
as the beginning of his signs,
and he made his glory manifest,
and his disciples put their faith in him.
After this,
he and his mother,
and his brothers and his disciples,
went down to Capernaum,
but they did not stay there many days.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
He found in the temple,
those selling cattle,
and sheep,
and doves.
For a sheep of this quality,
why do you ask for more?
That is the price.
This is all we have.
Money brokers in their seats.
After making a whip of ropes,
he drove all those with the sheep and cattle
out of the temple,
and he poured out the coins of the money changes,
turned their tables,
and he said to those selling the doves.
Take these things away from here.
Stop making a house of my father.
A house of commerce.
His disciples recalled that it is written,
the zeal for your house will consume me.
What sign can you show us
since you're doing these things?
Tehran, this temple,
in three days, I will raise it up.
This temple was built in 46 years.
And will you raise it up in three days?
But he was talking about the temple of his body.
When, though, he was raised up from the dead,
his disciples recalled that he used to say this,
and they believed in this scripture,
and what Jesus had spoken,
when he was in Jerusalem at the festival of the Passover.
Many people put their faith in his name,
when they saw the signs that he was performing,
but Jesus would not entrust himself to them,
because he knew them all,
and because he did not need to have anyone there witness about man.
For he knew what was in man.